Issue 744 (#764)
IBM/FHIR: fhir-persistence-schema/docs/DB2MultiTenancy.md

**Table: TENANT_KEYS**

The Tenant Keys table stores a hashed version of the tenant specific key. Upon creating a session and calling the SET_TENANT procedure, the SET_TENANT queries the incoming key against the TENANT_KEYS database to map to a specific tenant MT_ID. 

| Column Name | Data Type | Length | Null | Purpose |
|----------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------------------------------------|
| TENANT_KEY_ID | Integer | 4 | No | The ID is from the sequence, and is used to identify the unique entry in the row |
| MT_ID | Integer | 4 | No | Matches to the MT_ID in the TENANTS table |
| TENANT_SALT | VARCHAR | 44 | No | A 32 byte random value used as a salt when computing the SHA-256 tenant hash |
| TENANT_HASH | VARBINARY | 32 | No | Each tenant's data is encrypted. |

The tenant_key is a 32 byte random value created when the tenant is provisioned. This is a secret, and must be passed by the client to the database in order to obtain access to a tenant. A tenant may have multiple tenant keys to support key rotation. An example of the tenant key is `GQUHRi0ETFw0Xe+p1VtVDki4JFZs885bGM35hXRyq/E=`

> 

Reviewer: how to rotate the keys?  does this mean we can run the com.ibm.fhir.schema.app.Main app multiple times to add new tenant for the same tenant name? and these multiple keys can work at the same time...

Author: That's right. You create a new one, and you can remove the unused one.

Multiple keys per tenant are supported, and key rotation includes adding, and then subsequently removing prior keys. 

**Table: VERSION_HISTORY**

The VERSION_HISTORY table enables Tenant version isolation, so upgrades and patches are separately applied to each tenant's schema. 

> 

Reviewer: on each tenant's schema or on "each tenant schema"?
e.g, we have FHIRDATA and FHIRDATA2 schemas in CDT, so we have 2 tenant schemas there. and tenants can be created in each of these 2 tenant schema...  so, we don't really update the schema per tenant ...

Author: The code actually supports this feature.  We just chose not to take this step in CDT.

Reviewer: en... this is interesting... Is it "TableSpace" as OBJECT_TYPE and tenant name or id as OBJECT_NAME if we choose to upgrade schema for a certain tenant only?   
BTW, I noticed that schemaName is not really used in allocateTenant(String adminSchemaName, String schemaName, String tenantName, String tenantKey, String tenantSalt, String idSequenceName) ...

Author: OBJECT_NAME is not a tenant_name.  It's inferred based 

Yeah - that's right allocateTenant actually figures it out in the query.

Reviewer 2: I had the same question and I'm still confused.  The code supports updating the tables on a per-*schema* basis right?  Which might be a single tenant or might be many tenants?

Author: >  e.g, we have FHIRDATA and FHIRDATA2 schemas in CDT, so we have 2 tenant schemas there. and tenants can be created in each of these 2 tenant schema... so, we don't really update the schema per tenant ...

Well.  Let me clarify... the code technically supports it.  We're just breaking the model by removing columns and changing indices.  It does support independent updates.  We also support independent schemas.  

I've changed the words and given a few cases where this is true.

Author: > en... this is interesting... Is it "TableSpace" as OBJECT_TYPE and tenant name or id as OBJECT_NAME if we choose to upgrade schema for a certain tenant only?
an OBJECT_TYPE is one of the types

[db2inst1@c1ed9e48d0ab ~]$ db2 "SELECT DISTINCT OBJECT_TYPE FROM FHIR_ADMIN.VERSION_HISTORY"

OBJECT_TYPE
----------------
PROCEDURE
SEQUENCE
TABLE
TABLESPACE
VARIABLE

  5 record(s) selected.

We only pass in the tenant_id and run an updateSchema action. 

> BTW, I noticed that schemaName is not really used in allocateTenant(String adminSchemaName, String schemaName, String tenantName, String tenantKey, String tenantSalt, String idSequenceName) ...
Yes, this is correct... the actions taken in each part of the fhir-persistence-schema does not necessarily use all inputs.

Author: > I had the same question and I'm still confused. The code supports updating the tables on a per-_schema_ basis right? Which might be a single tenant or might be many tenants?

It's actually not the design... it's just how we've done it that has broken the contract.  Robin did an always add approach, don't take away... This has resulted in an update independent approach.  We can support it, however, we haven't followed it. 

I've elaborated in the document explaining.

| Column Name | Data Type | Length | Null | Purpose |
|----------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------------------------------------|
| SCHEMA_NAME | VARCHAR | 64 | No | The name of the schema where the object resides|
| OBJECT_TYPE | VARCHAR | 16 | No | The type of the object - Procedure, Sequence, Table, TableSpace, Variable |
| OBJECT_NAME | VARCHAR | 64 | No | The name of the object in the schema |
| VERSION | INTEGER | 4 | No | The version starting at one and incrementing with every version change |
| APPLIED | TIMESTAMP | 10 | No | The time of the latest object update |

### Schema: Tenant-Specific

The Tenant specific data is partitioned and isolated in a customer specific tablespace.  The tenant data is not mixed with other tenant data physically using the tablespace isolation. 

> 

Reviewer: does this mean we can not query the total number of Patients across all the tenants in one sql, and we have to set tenant id and query them one by one and the do the sum...

Author: Yes - in a multi-tenant schema.

Reviewer 2: I've always had this question too...
Is there some way to grant cross-tenant capabilities to an admin role?
Seems like that could be useful, although I guess its designed to prevent that (for security reasons)...

Author: I've elaborated, as this is working as designed and intentional.  I added a paragraph explaining HOW one would accomplish it, and how the restrictions are enforced.

Tenants are never able to see each other's data, each user is only able to see a single tenant's data. 

Each tenant's data is able to be moved, backedup, restored or exported a tenant-at-a-time.  This approach allows tenant independent restore points.

> 

Reviewer: using DB2 DB backup tool?  just curious how to tell it which tenant to backup if use the DB2 tools ...

Author: it's based on partition and tablespace.

Author: I've elaborated on line 76 (in next commit)

The isolated data supports tenant independent query plan caches, scaling and disambiguating tenant specific disk and space usage. The performance metrics are tenant specific, and diagnostics are tenant specific. 

**Table: Resources**

> Each resource is contains a root RESOURCE and LOGICAL RESOURCE, such as VISIONPRESCRIPTION:

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth mentioning the distinction between these tables here?
`_LOGICAL_RESOURCES` has one record per resource;
`_RESOURCES` has one record for each version of each resource

I think "root resource" makes sense in the case of `_LOGICAL_RESOURCES`, but I'm not sure about `_RESOURCES`.

Author: added

```
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_RESOURCES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_LOGICAL_RESOURCES
```

These values are mapped to specific FHIR Search value types, supporting parameter searches: 

```
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_COMPOSITES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_DATE_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_LATLNG_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_NUMBER_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_QUANTITY_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_STR_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_TOKEN_VALUES
```

> There are also global tables which enable a global search using the logical_resource and resource.  

Reviewer 2: Not sure if I'm misreading this or not, but just to clarify:  there is a global `LOGICAL_RESOURCES` table, but no global `RESOURCES` table.

Author: yes - that's right - and the global is still per tenant.  I'll elaborate a bit more on 101. (actually a lot)...

Each row is secured using DB2 Row Permission. The Stored Procedure is the ONLY way for a user to set the variable, which is used in the DB2 Row Permission. 

> Each tenant's data is encrypted. 

Reviewer 2: For Db2 on Cloud, it uses Db2 native encryption.  This means there is a single key that encrypts all the tenants.  There is currently no way to encrypt each tenant's tablespace with a different key.

Author: done

Offboarding a tenant's data is accomplished using dettach/drop partition, and subsequently dropping the tablespace. 

**Stored Procedure: FHIR_ADMIN.SET_TENANT**

The FHIR_ADMIN.SET_TENANT is used at the beginning of a connection to the IBM FHIR Server's multi-tenant schema. The SET_TENANT takes as input: tenant_name VARCHAR(36), tenant_key  VARCHAR(44).  The content outputs a connection specific variable `fhir_admin.sv_tenant_id` with the `tenant.mt_id`, which is automatically applied to the INSERT,SELECT,UPDATE,DELETE.  Only tenant's with status ALLOCATED are allowed to execute the actions.

To use the stored procedure from the db2 administrative console. 

* Map Tenant and Key to Tenant ID (Stored Procedure) - `CALL FHIR_ADMIN.set_tenant('a-tenant-name', 'BLAH_BLAH');`
* Show the value set for the session - `VALUES fhir_admin.sv_tenant_id;`
* Execute the query, such as `SELECT * FROM FHIRDATA.MEDICATION_RESOURCES`

**Schema: Permissions**

The Multi-tenant schema sets the following permissions: 

> - All objects in schema FHIRADMIN are owned by user FHIRADMIN

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- All objects in schema FHIR_ADMIN are owned by user FHIRADMIN
```

Reviewer 2: Also, the FHIRADMIN user name is just an example, right?  I don't think the `fhir-persistence-schema` Main program actually creates this user...it just uses whatever you've configured?
Locally, I just use `db2inst1`.  For Db2 on Cloud, I've just used the default `bluadmin` user for this part...

Author: Fixed

- All objects in schema FHIRDATA are owned by user FHIRADMIN
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIRADMIN.SET_TENANT TO FHIRUSER;
- GRANT READ ON FHIRADMIN.SV_TENANT_ID TO FHIRUSER;
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIRDATA.ADD_RESOURCE_TYPE TO FHIRUSER;
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIRDATA.ADD_RESOURCE TO FHIRUSER;

> - GRANT SELECT,INSERT,UPDATE,DELETE ON FHIRDATA.PATIENT_RESOURCES TO FHIRUSER;

Reviewer 2: Pretty sure I switched these over to `FHIRSERVER` a while back.  This is to distinguish it from the default user of the FHIR APIs which is FHIRUser.
Please help me squash all references to FHIRUSER as a user of the db.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIRADMIN.SET_TENANT TO FHIRSERVER;
- GRANT READ ON FHIRADMIN.SV_TENANT_ID TO FHIRSERVER;
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIRDATA.ADD_RESOURCE_TYPE TO FHIRSERVER;
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIRDATA.ADD_RESOURCE TO FHIRSERVER;
- GRANT SELECT,INSERT,UPDATE,DELETE ON FHIRDATA.PATIENT_RESOURCES TO FHIRSERVER;
```

Author: Fixed all over

FHIRADMIN owns all schema objects. 

> FHIR User is granted a minimum set of priveleges. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FHIRSERVER is granted a minimum set of privileges. 
```

Author: fixed

SET_TENANT is the only way to write the SV_TENANT_ID. 

The diagram outlines the relationships between the administrative and tenant schema. 

> ![permissions-overview.png](permissions-overview.png)

Reviewer 2: please update diagram to use `FHIRSERVER` instead of `FHIRUSER` as the db user

Author: done

To use the stored procedure from the Db2 administrative console. 

* Map Tenant and Key to Tenant ID (Stored Procedure) - `CALL FHIR_ADMIN.set_tenant('a-tenant-name', 'BLAH_BLAH');`
* Show the value set for the session - `VALUES fhir_admin.sv_tenant_id;`
* Execute the query, such as `SELECT * FROM FHIRDATA.MEDICATION_RESOURCES`

**Schema: Permissions**

The Multi-tenant schema sets the following permissions: 
- All objects in schema FHIR_ADMIN are owned by user FHIRADMIN
- All objects in schema FHIRDATA are owned by user FHIRADMIN
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIR_ADMIN.SET_TENANT TO FHIRSERVER;
- GRANT READ ON FHIR_ADMIN.SV_TENANT_ID TO FHIRSERVER;
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIRDATA.ADD_RESOURCE_TYPE TO FHIRSERVER;
- GRANT EXECUTE ON FHIRDATA.ADD_RESOURCE TO FHIRSERVER;
- GRANT SELECT,INSERT,UPDATE,DELETE ON FHIRDATA.PATIENT_RESOURCES TO FHIRSERVER;

> FHIR_ADMIN owns all schema objects. 

Reviewer 2: Above we say the table name is FHIR_ADMIN but the username is FHIRADMIN
```suggestion
FHIRADMIN owns all schema objects. 
```
